Antarctic lakes
Antarctica: unique lake systems that are sentinels for climate change
Only 0.4% of the total ice area of Antarctica (12.3 × 106 km2) is seasonally ice-free, comprising exposed mountains (e.g. Ellsworth and Transantarctic Mountains, the North Victoria Land mountains and the nanutuks) and coastal areas (e.g. lower-latitude Antarctic Peninsula in West Antarctica, and the Vestfold Hills and McMurdo Dry Valleys) (Poland et al., 2003; Carey et al., 2010) (Fig. 1). Within this ice-free 50,850 km2 area of Antarctica, the geographic distribution and diversity of types of aquatic systems is considerable; ranging from fresh to hypersaline, permanently ice covered to perennially ice free, and mixed to stratified (dimictic, polymictic, amictic, meromictic). Lake biota is microbially dominated with generally reduced diversity and few or no metazoans present (Laybourn-Parry, 1997), and distinct communities inhabit specific niches including ice, the water column, sediment and microbial mats.
The age of water within Antarctic lakes varies considerably, with the subglacial outflow from Blood Falls estimated to be 1.5 million years old (Mickucki et al., 2009), the water in Ace Lake about ~5000 years old (Rankin et al., 1999), and Lake Miers water less than 300 years old (Green et al., 1988). Subglacial and epiglacial lakes also appear to be prevalent in Antarctica with at least 145 subglacial lakes identified (Siegert et al., 2005; Gibson, 2006; Cavicchioli, 2007; Pearce, 2009). Epiglacial lakes form as a result of glacier ice melt, on the down, ice flow side of mountains that penetrate the polar ice cap, and organisms inhabiting the lakes could be recent (post-glacial) or ancient inhabitants of Antarctica (Gibson, 2006; Cavicchioli, 2007). 
In the Vestfold Hills (68° 33' S, 78° 15' E) more than 300 lakes and ponds from freshwater (<0.1%) to hypersaline (32%) have been described, including ~20% of the world's meromictic lakes (Gibson, 1999). The Australian Antarctic Data Centre describes more than 3000 water bodies (fresh and saline) mapped in the Vestfold Hills, ranging in area from 1 to 8,757,944 m2. Fjords connected to the ocean also cut across the Vestfold Hills. Some of these are large, such as Ellis Fjord which is 10km long, up to 100m deep and has become a stratified system due to its restricted opening (less then 4m deep) to the ocean (Burke & Burton, 1988). Many of the coastal lake systems, including a large number in the Vestfold Hills, are marine derived, having been separated from the marine environment ~3,000–7,000 years ago by isostatic rebound of the Antarctic continent (Gibson, 1999). The marine derived systems provide unique opportunities for studying the evolution of marine microbial populations to chemically, physically and temporally defined ecosystem changes (e.g. Lauro et al., 2011). Due to global warming, by being exposed annually to longer periods of temperatures above 0°C, the lake systems are at an increasing risk of being physically perturbed (e.g. ice cover melt exposing the water column to longer periods of wind turbulence, and increasing surface temperatures and irradiation penetrating deeper and for longer). 
The reduced biodiversity of Antarctic lakes makes them ideal model systems to examine microbial influence on geochemistry as it is possible to encompass a large proportion of the diversity present and relate taxa to particular processes (Laybourn-Parry & Pearce, 2007; Lauro et al., 2011). Through the use of molecular methods, new insights are being derived on how microbes have adapted to the Antarctic environment under a diverse array of chemical and physical conditions.Ironically, by being especially sensitive to climatic influences, these Antarctic lakes function as sentinels for monitoring climate change. By understanding plausible functional relationships between ecosystem components in these lakes, there is capacity to monitor ecosystem health. By providing key sentinel indicators, managers of human activities, policy makers, scientists and the general public can become better informed about the causes and effects, and consequences of human activities, including anthropogenic climate change.
The topics in this Antarctic lakes section describe findings linked to important members of the Bacteria, Archaea, Eucarya and viruses that inhabit the water column, assessments of lake microbial mat communities, and “omic”-based studies that have led to an integrated view of ecosystem function.

Molecular approaches used in Antarctic lake systems
The majority of molecular-based studies of Antarctic aquatic microbial communities have made use of PCR amplification of small subunitribosomal RNA sequences to survey the diversity of bacteria and in some cases archaea and eucarya (Table 1). Microbial composition has been determined by cloning and sequencing of rRNA gene amplicons exclusively (Bowmanet al., 2000a; Bowman et al., 2000b; Gordon et al., 2000; Christner et al., 2001; Purdy et al., 2003; Karr et al., 2006;Matsuzaki et al., 2006; Kurosawa et al., 2010;Bielewicz et al., 2011), although most studies have also made use of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) to provide a molecular ‘fingerprint’ of the community (Pearce, 2003; Pearce et al., 2003; Karr et al., 2005; Pearce, 2005; Pearce et al., 2005; Unrein et al., 2005; Glatz et al., 2006; Mikucki & Priscu, 2007; Mosier et al., 2007; Schiaffino et al., 2009; Villaescusa, 2010). Functional genes have also been targeted using PCR amplification to assess the potential of biochemical processes occurring, such as nitrogen fixation (Olsen et al., 1998), ammonia oxidation (Voytek et al., 1999), anoxygenic photosynthesis (Karr et al., 2003), and dissimilatory sulfite reduction (Karr et al., 2005; Mikucki et al., 2009). 
Empowered by technological advances in DNA sequencing, the value of applying metagenomics to microbial communities in Antarctic lakes has been realized (Cavicchioli, 2007; Yau &Cavicchioli, 2011). Metagenomic studies have assessed both the taxonomic composition and genetic potential of lake communities, and in some cases have linked function to specific members of the community(Lopez-Bueno et al., 2009; Ng et al., 2010; Lauro et al., 2011; Yau et al., 2011; Varin et al., 2012). When coupled with functional “omic” techniques (to date metaproteomics has been applied, but not metatranscriptomics or stable isotope probing), information has also been gained about the genetic complement that has been expressed by the resident populations (Ng et al., 2010; Lauro et al., 2011; Yau et al., 2011).

Bacterial diversity: adaptation to unique physical and chemical conditions
The vast majority of molecular studies of Antarctic lakes have focused on bacteria. Consistent with the wide range of physical and chemical properties of Antarctic lakes, a large variation in species assemblages have been found. While exchange of microorganisms must be able to occur between lakes that are in close vicinity to each other, the picture that has emerged from the data to date is that microbial populations arerelatively unique to each type of isolated system. Nonetheless, certain trends in bacterial composition are also apparent. Focusing on the similarities, lakes of equivalent salinities tend to have similar communities. Hypersaline lakes from the Vestfold Hills (Bowman et al., 2000b) and McMurdo Dry Valleys (Glatz et al., 2006; Mosier et al., 2007) were all dominated by Gammaproteobacteria and members of the Cytophaga-Flavobacterium-Bacteroides (CFB) group (= Bacteroidetes) as well as harboring lower abundance populations of Alphaproteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Firmicutes. The surface waters of saline lakesresemble marine communities dominated by CFB, Alphaproteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria, but divisions such as Actinobacteria and specific clades ofCyanobacteria have been found to be overrepresented compared to the ocean (Lauro et al., 2011). Sediments from saline lakes in the Vestfold Hills (Bowman et al., 2000a) and Nuramake-Ike in the Syowa Oasis (Kurasawa et al., 2010) were very similar, containing in addition to the surface clades, Deltaproteobacteria, Planctomycetes, Spirochaetes, Chloroflexi (green non-sulfur bacteria), Verrucomicrobia and representatives of candidate divisions. Plankton from freshwater lakes were characterized by an abundance of Betaproteobacteria, although Actinobacteria, CFB-group, Alphaproteobacteria and Cyanobacteria were also prominent (Pearce et al., 2003; Pearce, 2005; Pearce et al., 2005; Schiaffino et al., 2009). 
Differences in bacterial community structure are also influenced by nutrient availability. In studies of freshwater lakes in the Antarctic Peninsula and the South Shetland Islands, cluster analysis of DGGE profiles grouped together lakes of similar trophic status (Schiaffino et al., 2009; Villaescusa et al., 2010). Most of the variance in community structure could be explained by related chemical parameters such as phosphate and dissolved inorganic nitrogen. Similarly, three freshwater lakes, Moss, Sombre and Heywood on Signy Island are alike except that Heywood Lake is enriched by organic inputs from seals. Bacterial composition in each lake changed from winter to summer and this was again correlated to variation in physico-chemical properties (Pearce, 2005). The bacterial population of Heywood Lake had shifted from a dominance of Cyanobacteria towards a greater abundance of Actinobacteria and marine Alphaproteobacteria (Pearce et al., 2005). This hints at a link between a copiotrophic lifestyle in the Heywood Lake Actinobacteria and inhibition of Antarctic freshwater Cyanobacteriaby eutrophication. This type of study exemplifies how inferences can be made about taxa and function by examining population changes over time and over gradients of environmental parameters.
Inferring functional potential from taxonomic surveys can be problematic due to species or strain level differences in otherwise related bacteria. For example, the majority of the Gammaproteobacteria in hypersaline lakes were relatives ofMarinobacter suggesting that this genus is particularly adapted to hypersaline systems (Bowman et al., 2000b; Glatz et al., 2006; Matsuzaki et al., 2006; Mosier et al., 2007).Nonetheless, Marinobacter species from different lakes appeared biochemically distinct as isolates from hypersaline lake Suribati-Ike were all able to respire dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) but not nitrate (Matsuzaki et al., 2006). In contrast, those from the west lobe of Lake Bonney were all able to respire nitrate (Ward & Priscu, 1997). Interestingly, in the east lobe of the same lake, nitrate respiration was inhibited although a near-identical Marinobacter phylotype was present; it was speculated that the inhibition may have been caused by an as yet unidentified chemical factor (Ward et al., 2005; Glatz et al., 2006). 
The relative isolation and diverse chemistries of the lakes facilitatesbiogeographical studies. The anoxic and sulfidic bottom waters of some meromictic lakes form due to a densitygradient that precludes mixing. Although sedimentation from the upper aerobic waters may occur, there is little opportunity for interchange of species with the bottom water of lakes allowing for greater divergence in community composition as nutrients can become depleted and products of metabolism can accumulate. As a result, distinct distributions of bacterial groups can inhabit these strata, and different types of microorganisms can be found in equivalent strata in different lakes. A good example of this is the presence of common types of purple sulfur bacteria (Chromatiales)and green sulfur bacteria (GSB, = Chlorobi) in some meromictic lakes and stratified fjords in the Vestfold Hills (Burke & Burton, 1988), compared to diverse “purple non-sulfur bacteria" in Lake Fryxell in Victoria Land (Karr et al., 2003). 
In Lake Bonney, the east and west lobes harbor overlapping but distinct communities in the suboxic waters (Glatz et al., 2006). The east lobe was dominated by Gammaproteobacteriaand the west lobe by CFB, illustrating how divergent communities can form from the same seed population. In contrast, ice communities are more readily dispersed by wind, aerosols and melt-water and 16S rRNA gene probes designed from bacteria trapped in the permanent ice-cover of Lake Bonney hybridized to microbial mat libraries sourced up to 15 km away (Gordon et al., 2000). This demonstrates how a single lake may encompass microorganisms that are biogeographically dispersed, while also harboring others thathave restricted niches and are under strongerselection pressure.
Subglacial systems, such as Lake Vostok, have been isolated from the open environment for hundreds of thousands to millions of years (Siegert et al., 2001). As a result they provide a reservoir of microorganisms that may have undergone significant evolutionary divergence from the same seed populations that were not isolated by the Antarctic ice cover. The uniqueness of these types of systems also creates a conundrum for studying them. Lake Vostok is approximately 4 km below the continental ice-sheet making it extremely difficult to determine suitable means for accessing the lake without inadvertently contaminating it with biological (e.g. surface microorganisms) or chemical (e.g. drilling fluid) matter (Inman 2005; Wingham et al., 2006; Lukin &Bulat 2011; Gramling, 2012; Jones, 2012). To date, molecular microbial studies have concentrated on the accretion ice above the ice-water interface (Priscu et al., 1999;Christner et al., 2000). Accretion ice has been found to contain a low density of bacterial cells from Alphaproteobacteria, Betaproteobacteria, Actinobacteria and CFBdivisions closely allied to other cold environments. Molecular signatures of a thermophilic Hydrogenophilusspecies were also identified in accretion ice raising the possibility that chemoautotrophic thermophiles were delivered to the accretion ice from hydrothermal areas in thelake’s bedrock (Bulat et al., 2004; Lavire et al., 2007). However, interpretation of results from samples sourced from the Lake Vostok bore hole are very challenging as it is difficult to differentiate contaminants from native Vostok microorganisms. From a study that assessed possible contaminants present in hydrocarbon-based drilling fluid retrieved from the Vostok ice core bore hole, six phylotypes were designated as new contaminants (Alekhina et al., 2007). Two of these were Sphingomonas phylotypes essentially identical to those found in the accretion ice-core (Christner et al., 2000) which raises question about whether bacterial signatures identified from the ice-cores are representative of Lake Vostok water, and further highlights the ongoing problem of causing forward contamination into the lake.

Archaea: methanogens and haloarchaea
Archaea have been detected mainly in anoxic sediments and bottom waters from lakes that range in salinity from fresh to hypersaline, and those with known isolates are affiliated with methanogens or haloarchaea (Bowman et al., 2000a; Bowman et al., 2000b; Purdy et al., 2003; Kurasawa et al., 2010; Lauro et al., 2011). Anoxia allows for the growth of methanogenic archaea that mineralize fermentation products such as acetate, and H2and CO2into methane, thereby performing an important step in carbon cycling. The acetoclastic methanogens thrive in environments where alternative terminal electron acceptors such as sulfate and nitrate have been depleted. One example of this is Lake Heywood where methanogenic archaea were found to comprise 34% of the total microbial population in the freshwater sediment, the majority of which were Methanosarcinales which include acetate and C1-compound utilizing methanogens (Purdy et al., 2003). Both H2:CO2 (Methanogenium frigidum) and methylamine/methanol (Methanococcoides burtonii) utilizing methanogens were isolated from Ace Lake (Franzmann et al., 1992, 1997) providing opportunities for genomic analyses (Saunders et al., 2003; Allen et al., 2009) and a host of studies addressing molecular mechanisms of cold adaptation (e.g. Cavicchioli, 2006; Williams et al.,2011).
In general, archaeal populations appear to be adapted to their specific lake environment. Sediments from saline lakes of the Vestfold Hills were inhabited by members of the Euryarchaeota typically found in sediment and marine environments with the phylotypes differing between the lakes examined (Bowman et al., 2000a). While a phylotype similar to Methanosarcinawas identified, the majority were highly divergent. Similarly, Methanosarcina and Methanoculleuswere detected in Lake Fryxell but other members of the Euryarchaeota and Crenarchaeota (a single sequence) were divergent, clustering only with marine clones (Karr et al., 2006). Based on the lake chemical gradients and the location of these novel phylotypes in the water column the authors speculated these archaea may be have alternative metabolisms such as anoxic methanotrophy or sulfur-utilization. In sediments from Lake Nurume-Ike in the Langhovde region, 205 archaeal clones grouped into three phylotypes, with the predominant archaeal clone being related to a clone from Burton Lake in the Vestfold Hills, while the other two did not match to any cultivated species (Kurasawa et al., 2010). Consistent with these observations, from a metagenomic study that involved the analysis of ~9 million genes, a high level of divergence was found for the archaea present in the bottom waters of Ace Lake; the majority of which did not match to known methanogens including M. frigidum and M. burtonii that were isolated from the lake (Lauro et al., 2011). However, high levels of methane are present in Ace Lake bottom waters and this is likely to have been produced gradually by the methanogenic community, and retained in the lake due to the very low potentialfor aerobic methane oxidation and the apparent absenceof anaerobic methane oxidizing (ANME)Euryarchaeota (Lauro et al., 2011).
In hypersaline lakes where bottom waters do not become completely anoxic, methanogens are not present and archaea have extremely low abundance. For example, only two archeael clones of the same phylotype were recovered from deep water samples from Lake Bonney (Glatz et al., 2006), and Organic Lake in the Vestfold Hills had an extremely low abundance of archaeal clones related to Halobacteriales (Bowman et al., 2000b). In contrast to these stratified hypersaline lakes, the microbial community in the extremely hypersaline Deep Lake isdominated by haloarchaea (Bowman et al., 2000b). Many of the clones identified from Deep Lake are similar toHalorubrum (formerly Halobacterium) lacusprofundi which was isolated from the lake (Franzmann et al., 1988). The genome sequence of H. lacusprofundi has been completed, and ongoing metagenome studies are examining the microbial community composition and microbial ecology of the lake (Cavicchioli R, et al., unpublished results). 

Eucarya perform multiple ecosystem roles
Single-celled Eucarya are important members of Antarctic aquatic microbial communities. In many Antarctic systems, eucaryal algae are the main photosynthetic organisms and in others, only heterotrophic protists occupy the top trophic level. As eucaryal cells are generally large with characteristic morphologies, microscopic identifications have been used. However, microscopy is unable to classify smaller cells such as nanoflagellates with high resolution, although these may constitute a high proportion of algal biomass. For example, five morphotypes of Chrysophyceae, evident in Antarcticlakes were unidentifiable by light microscopy but were able to be classified using DGGE and DNA sequencing (Unreinet al., 2005).Consistent with this, molecular studies specifically targeting eucaryal diversity (Unrein et al., 2005; Mosier et al., 2007; Bielewicz et al., 2011) have identified a much higher level of diversity than previously suspected, and the studies have discovered lineages not previously known to be present such as silicoflagellates (Unrein et al., 2005) and fungi (Mosier et al., 2007; Bielewicz et al., 2011).
Most eucarya in Antarctic lakes are photosynthetic microalgae that are present in marine environments with a wide distribution including chlorophytes, haptophytes, cryptophytes and bacillariophytes. Molecular methods have afforded deeper insight into the phylogenetic diversity within these broader divisions and have revealed some patterns in their distribution. Using 18S rRNA gene amplification and DGGE, the same chrysophyte phylotypes were identified in lakes from the Antarctic Peninsula and King George Island despite being 220 km apart (Unrein et al., 2005) indicating these species may be well-adapted to Antarctica or highly dispersed. Similarly, an unknown stramenopile sequence was detected throughout the 18S rRNA clone libraries of Lake Bonney demonstrating a previously unrecognized taxon occupied the entire photic zone in the lake (Bielewicz et al., 2011). In constrast, other groups showed distinct vertical and temporal distributions with cryptophytes dominating the surface, haptophytes the midwaters and chlorophytes the deeper layers during the summer while stramenopiles increased in the winter (Bielewicz et al., 2011). 
The influence of flagellates on ecosystem function is not necessarily clear-cut as they can simultaneously inhabit several trophic levels. For instance, in Ace Lake the mixotrophic phytoflagellate Pyramimonasgelidocola derives a proportion of its carbon intake through bacterivory (Bell & Laybourn-Parry, 2003) but in the nearby Highway Lake, it uptakes dissolved organic carbon (Laybourn-Parry et al., 2005). This again illustrates potential limitations for deriving ecosystem level functions from taxonomic studies alone, even with taxa that appear physiologically straightforward. A good illustration of this was the finding from shotgun metagenomics that a large proportion of the 18S rRNA gene sequences in the aerobic zone of Ace Lake were related to Mantoniella, a picoeucaryal member of the Chlorophyta, and that phycodnaviruses were likely to be controlling the seasonal population dynamics of this alga (Lauro et al., 2011); previously it was interpreted that the virus-like particles were likely to be bacteriophages infecting bacteria (Madan et al., 2005).Further studies are necessary to determine the basis for apparent specific adaptations of some species to particular lakes or lake strata, and for the cosmopolitan distribution of others. Here, molecular based research of the kind that has been applied to bacteria such as functional gene surveys will undoubtedly help answer these questions.

Antarctic virus diversity and top-down ecosystem control 
In the absence of metazoan grazers, viruses are hypothesized to play an increased role in the microbial loop in Antarctic systems (Kepner et al.,1998) and as drivers of microbial evolution (Anesio & Bellas, 2011). This idea has been supported by microscopy-based observations of viral density, virus to bacteria ratios and infection rates that are different in Antarctic lakes than lower latitude systems (Laybourn-Parry et al., 2001;Madan et al., 2005; Laybourn-Parry et al., 2007; Säwström et al., 2007). Morphological examination of virus-like particles only provides limited insight into viral physiology and diversity. Metagenomics has enabled unprecedented insight into viruses by permitting more precise classification, information on genetic content and discovery of novel species. 
Metagenomic analysis of the viriome of the freshwater Lake Limnopolar, Livingston Island uncovered the greatest depth of viral diversity of any aquatic system to date (López-Bueno et al., 2009).Representatives from 12 viral families were detected, but unlike the two previous viromes that had been published at that time using comparable techniques, ssDNA viruses and large dsDNA viruses that putatively infect eucarya were the dominant viral types rather than bacteriophages. The ssDNA viruses were related to circoviruses, geminiviruses, nanoviruses and satellites; viruses previously only known to infect plants and animals indicating they are much more diverse than previously suspected and may constitute new viral families. Samples taken in summer showed a shift in the viral community composition towards phycodnaviruses similar to Ostreococcustauri virus, OtV5. This shift potentially reflects an increase in the host algae that are stimulated to bloom by the increased light availability. 
Metagenomic data from Ace Lake revealed a viral community comprising Phycodnaviridae, Myoviridae, Siphoviridae, Podoviridae and unidentified viral families (Lauro et al., 2011). Bacteriophage were abundant in the bottom waters, whereas the surface summer community, similar to Lake Limnopolar (López-Bueno et al., 2009), was dominated by phycodnaviruses (Lauro et al., 2011). Most notably, no viral signatures were found at 12.7 m depth, which is a zone occupied by a near-clonal population of GSB. Mathematical modeling predictedthat the absence of phage predation in the GSB could be due to an adaptation to longer cycles of growth and inactivity in response to the polar light regime. Phototrophs with faster growth rates, such as eucaryal algae and cyanobacteria in the surface water, were predicted to be more susceptible to viral predation. The viral susceptibility of these phototrophs was predicted to lead to increased host genetic variation, and this was borne out in the analysis of the metagenome data (Lauro et al., 2011). 
Metagenome analysis also unveiled some very unexpected findings about viral-host interactions in Organic Lake in the Vestfold Hills. In the metagenome a relative of the newly described virophage family(La Scola et al., 2008; Fischer & Suttle, 2011)was discovered (Yau et al., 2011). A virophage depends upon a giant helper or ‘host’ virus to replicate but is detrimental to its helper(La Scola et al., 2008). Termed the Organic Lake virophage (OLV), genomic evidence pointed towards OLV being a virophage of Organic Lake phycodnaviruses (OLPV) that infect eucaryal algae (Yau et al., 2011). Modeling of the OLV–OLPV and algal host dynamics indicated that the presence of OLV may contribute to stability of the algal populations by increasing the frequency of algal blooms, and contributing to the carbon flux throughout the lake. The major capsid protein gene sequence was also detected in Ace Lake and a number of temperate aquatic environments suggesting that virophages may have wide-spread ecological influence.
Understanding of Antarctic viral diversity and ecology is still in its early days as a complete viral survey is problematic due to the lack of a universal viral gene or even universal genetic material. Furthermore, the enormous depth of viral diversity remains largely unsampled so most viral sequences have no significant similarity to sequence data repositories (López-Bueno et al., 2009; Yau et al., 2011). What is clear is that viruses perform a crucial role in shaping community structure, driving host evolution, contributing to the dissolved nutrient pool, and understanding them is essential to understanding ecosystem function (Danavoro et al., 2011). 


